---
title:   "Add a Dev Container"
assign:   
labels:           
  - name: "batch1"
    desc: "Pulls from batch1"
    color: "#881188"  
---

## 🤷‍♂️ Why 

A Devcontainer implies that your IDE is utilizing a container for your terminal and all your automations. This is _nice_ because a container is lightweight construct, that can be build from code. Consequently _all_ team mates _always_ work in the _exact same_ environment, based off a declarative version controlled recipe stored in the repository.

A _Devcontainer_ is a `JSON`flavour added to the container image during _build_. It's designed to make life easier for software developers.

> [!CAUTION]
> The image you choose as your foundation may limit what you can do and where it can run.

> [!TIP]
> In GitHub context a safe bet is to go with `ubuntu-latest`. This runner is the fastest one to launch in Workflows (not because it's slim, but because GitHub favors it). And for that same reason it's also the _only_ container that is supported in `copilot-setup-steps.yml`[^copilot-setup-steps.yml] 
> The Ubuntu `noble` (nick name for `24-04`) from the VS Code context matches `ubuntu-latest` in GitHub workflow context[^now].
>And it is compliant with both MacOS, Windows and Linus and both ARM64 and AMD64

[^copilot-setup-steps.yml]: `copilot-setup-steps.yml` is the workflow that Copilot looks for and runs when running in detached agentic mode.

[^now]: As of writing this in February 2026

## 💬 Prompt

```text
Create a devcontainer in the default location '.devcontainers/devcontainer.json'.
The image should be Ubuntu:noble and add the additional features 'GitHub CLI', 
'Common Utilities', Python' and 'Go'
```

## 🛠️ D.I.Y.

- [ ] **From the Command Palette[^shortcut] in VS Code** 

`Dev Containers:Add Dev Container Configurations Files...`

[^shortcut]: Command Palette shortcut  
Mac: ⬆⌘P (`shift+command+P`)  
Windows/Linux: ⬆^P (`shift+ctrl+P`)


- Add configuration to workspace
  - Ubuntu
    - noble
  - Select additional features to install
    - GitHub CLI ('devcontainers')
    - Common Utilities ('devcontainers')
    - Python ('devcontainers')
    - Go ('devcontainers')
  - Keep Defaults
  - Include `.github/dependabot`

The steps above will create `.devcontainer/devcontainer.json`

- [ ] **Reopen in container**

Command Palette

`Dev Containers:Reopen in Container`

- [ ] Test:

Open a terminal and run 

```bash
lsb_release -a
```

It should show the detailed distribution information (release, codename, etc.)

##🤖 Automate

```bash
.scripts/co-sample "Add a Dev Container" \
  origin/shadow/sample-batch1 \
  .devcontainer/devcontainer.json \
  .github/dependabot.yml
```
</details>

## 💣 Not so lucky?

Hmm your PC may not have Docker setup correctly (next step...)
