---
title:   "Setup git"
assign:
labels:           
  - name: "batch3"
    desc: "Pulls from batch3"
    color: "#661133"  
---

## 🤷‍♂️ Why 

Git is a tool that creates results: Commits, tags, and branches. You could argue; _as long as the result is compliant with the team's worthy-for-trunk quality, then you don't care what process led to the result._

But then again. Making sure that git works the same way for everyone in the team, essentially standardize the way you work, makes it much easier to continuously assess and improve the process and develop an explicit vocabulary and command set for how you work when you achieve the results.

> [!NOTE]
> Git is configured by the `gitconfig|.gitconfig` file and it comes in three standard flavors:
> - `system` (same folder at the `git` executable)
> - `global` (current user's `$HOME`)
> - `local` (current repository's `.git` folder)
> Unfortunately there is no default _location_ that supports what we really: _The repository root_.

> [!TIP]
> Git config supports extensions by other files through `include.path`. 
> Run:
>   `git config --local --add include.path ../.gitconfig`
> ...and the config file in your repo's `.git`folder will read the `.gitconfig` file in you repo root - if it exists.

Git hooks are amazing - especially `pre-commit`, but they are not widely used, which is a shame, as a local script performs 10-100 times faster than a GitHub workflow with the same function and it runs _before_ you commit any potential faults — not after. Running AI in agentic mode is usually detached from your `main` - on a separate branch, and any checks that occur runs _after_ the commit. So the `pre-commit` hook has the potential of a big revival in the age of AI bots and can really boost the quality od the work your AI bots do for you.

> [!TIP]
> When you create the `pre-commit` hook. Rather than hacking the hook directly, create a generic - reusable - scripts that you call (`source`) from the hook.
> We may find good use of this check, even outside the context of the `pre-commit` hook.

## 💬 Prompt

```text
Create a script 'trunk-worthy' that checks if the repo's current state is trunk 
material (linters, formatters, builds, unit tests, coverage). Create a 'pre-commit'
hook in a dedicated folder. Let the hook call the trunk-worthy script. Create a .gitconfig 
file in the root of the repo, with general settings and nice, widely used aliases, 
and which also sets the githooks path to the folder where you put the pre-commit hook. 
Also create a postCreateCommand.sh script that makes the local git config file include 
the one in the repo, and make the devcontainer.json run this script as the postCreateCommand.
Finally create a good, standard, generally useful '.gitignore' file in the repo root
```

## 🛠️ D.I.Y.

What we need are git-fu ninja tricks. The learning curve on becoming a black-belt git-fu ninja 🥷🏻 can be high. It takes a lot of training in the git dojo. This is why, teams often underestimate the value of setting git up. It's simply not a common skil, and therefore not on the radar as an option.

Spend more time in the git dojo!

## 🤖 Automation

```bash
.scripts/co-sample "Setup git" \
  origin/shadow/sample-batch3 \
  .gitconfig \
  .gitignore \
  .devcontainer/postCreateCommand.sh \
  .scripts/trunk-worthy \
  .githooks/pre-commit
```

- [ ] Rebuild the devcontainer.

## 🧪 Test 

Try to run:

```bash
git root
git st
.scripts/trunk-worthy
.githooks/pre-commit
git config list --show-origin
git config list --show-scope 
```